# **README**

## Project U. 5 "HWE: Analisis of population genetics"

Autor: Heriberto Vazquez Cardona (Social Service: Institute of Ecology)

### Objective:
This project creates two Hardy-Weingber Equilibrium Tests using 2 populations of maize, landraces: Vandeño and Chalqueño. 
Both tests will be comparate between them to know wich is in H-W Equilibrium.
 

### Repository:
This repository contains the 3 directories of the project.
- data: contains maize data. I didn't have the data of GBS, but I converted a plink file to VCF files (I got the data with my tutor Idalia Rojas).
- meta: contains one file to describe the data files. The other file explains how to use the graphic interface of Tassel5.
- bin: contains the scripts to create the H-W Equilibrium Test.

### Scripts
To run the scripts is necesary install Tassel5 and save the program in a tassel5 directory inside bin directory.

First, second and third script run with bash.

1. runtassel5.sh : works to come in the Tassel5 directory.
2. start_tassel.pl : it opens Tassel5.
3. unzipfileVCF.R : works to unzip VCF files: Z_Va.vcf.gz and Z_Ch.vcf.gz .

The next scripts use R to create the H-W Equilibrium Test.

1. convertVCFtogenind.R : it converts the 2 VCF files to genind objects. 
2. calculateHWE.R : it calculates the HW Equilibrium Tests using the genind file.
3. HWEplot.R : it makes the HWE plot.


### Comments:
I don't have my own data, so for this project I use tutor's data. 
I uploaded 3 files of Results and Discussion. VaHWE and ChHWE are results in a csv format. Discussion is one file about the two tests.


